
2144
Nutr Hosp. 2015;32(5):2144-2152
ISSN 0212-1611 • CODEN NUHOEQ
S.V.R. 318
Original / Alimentos funcionales
A coconut extra virgin oil-rich diet increases HDL cholesterol and decreases
waist circumference and body mass in coronary artery disease patients
Diuli A. Cardoso 1 , Annie S. B. Moreira2 , Glaucia M. M. de Oliveira1 , Ronir Raggio Luiz3 and
Glorimar Rosa 4
1
Postgraduate Program in Cardiology at the School of Medicine, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ). 2
Applied
Nutrition Department of Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UERJ); Research dietitian and professor at Instituto Nacional
de Cardiologia (INC). 3
Institute for Collective Health Studies, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro. 4
Department
of Nutrition and Dietetics, Josué de Castro Nutrition Institute of Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Brazil.
Abstract
Introduction: saturated fat restriction has been recom-
mended for coronary arterial disease, but the role of coco-
nut oil (Cocos nucifera L.) extra virgin, lauric acid source
in the management of lipid profile remains unclear.
Objective: to evaluate the effect of nutritional treat-
ment associated with the consumption of extra virgin co-
conut oil in anthropometric parameters and lipid profile.
Methods: we conducted a longitudinal study of 116
adults of both sexes presenting CAD. Patients were fo-
llowed in two stages: the first stage (basal-3 months),
intensive nutritional treatment. In the second stage
(3-6 months), the subjects were divided into two groups:
diet group associated with extra virgin coconut oil con-
sumption (GDOC) and diet group (DG). Held monthly
anthropometric measurements: body mass, waist circum-
ference (WC), neck circumference (PP), body mass index
(BMI). Gauged to collected blood pressure and blood sam-
ples were fasted for 12 hours, for total cholesterol analysis
and fractions apoproteins (Apo A-1 and B), glucose, glyca-
ted hemoglobin (HbA1C), insulin (I). Comparing the ave-
rages at the beginning and end of the study employing the
paired Student t-independent. And set the diastolic blood
pressure by BMI using ANOVA. Analyses were perfor-
med using the SPSS statistical package, being significant
p < 0.05.
Results: the mean age of the population was 62.4 ±
7.7 years, 63.2% male, 70% elderly, 77.6% infarcted,
52.6% with angina, hypertension and dyslipidemia
100%. In the first stage the nutritional treatment re-
duced body weight, WC, BMI and PP and insulin con-
centrations, HbA1C, HOMA-IR and QUICK, without
changing the other parameters. In the second stage of
the study, it was observed that the GDOC maintained the
reduction of body mass, BMI, WC, with a significant di-
fference between groups for DC (-2.1 ± 2,7cm; p < 0.01).
EL ACEITE DE COCO VIRGEN EXTRA
RICO EN ÁCIDOS GRASOS INCREMENTA
EL COLESTEROL HDL Y DISMINUYE LA
CIRCUNFERENCIA DE LA CINTURA Y LA
MASA CORPORAL EN PACIENTES CON
ENFERMEDADES DE LA ARTERIA CORONARIA
Resumen
Introducción: el aceite de coco (Cocos nucifera L.) vir-
gen extra contiene una alta proporción de ácidos grasos
de cadena media que parecen contribuir a la reducción
del peso y podría ayudar en la prevención secundaria de
la enfermedad arterial coronaria (EAC).
Objetivo: evaluar el efecto del tratamiento nutricional
asociado con el consumo de aceite de coco virgen extra en
los parámetros antropométricos y el perfil lipídico.
Métodos: se realizó un estudio longitudinal de 116
adultos de ambos sexos que presentan CAD. Los pacien-
tes fueron seguidos en dos etapas: en la primera etapa
(basal-3 meses), se llevo a cabo un tratamiento nutricio-
nal intensivo. En la segunda etapa (3-6 días), los suje-
tos fueron divididos en dos grupos: grupo asociado con
el consumo de aceite extra virgen de coco (GDOC) y el
grupo de dieta (GD). Se realizaron mediciones mensuales
antropométricas: peso, circunferencia de la cintura (CC),
circunferencia del cuello (PP) e índice de masa corporal
(IMC). Se tomó la presión arterial y muestras de sangre
recogidas en ayunas durante 12 horas para el análisis de
colesterol total y lipoproteínas, apoproteínas (Apo A-1 y
B), glucosa, hemoglobina glucosilada (HbA1c) e insulina
(I). Se compararon los promedios al principio y al final
del estudio mediante el test t de Student-independiente.
Se ajustó la presión arterial diastólica por el IMC me-
diante ANOVA. Los análisis se realizaron con el paquete
estadístico SPSS, siendo significativa p < 0.05.
Resultados: la edad media de la población fue de 62,4 ±
7,7 años, el 63,2% hombres, 70% mayores, el 77,6% con
infarto de miocardio, el 52,6% con angina de pecho y el
100% con hipertensión arterial y dislipidemia. En la pri-
mera etapa del tratamiento nutricional se redujeron las
concentraciones de insulina, peso, WC, IMC y PP, HbA1C,
HOMA-IR y rápido, sin cambiar otros parámetros. En la
segunda etapa del estudio se observó que la GDOC mantie-
ne la reducción del peso, BMI, WC, con una diferencia sig-
nificativa entre los grupos para DC (-2,1 ± 2,7 cm; p < 0,01).
Correspondence: Annie Bello Moreira.
Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro.
Rua São Francisco Xavier, 524, Pavilhão João Lyra Filho,
12.º andar, Bloco D, Cep: 20559-900 Rio de Janeiro, RJ – Brasil.
E-mail: anniebello@gmail.com
Recibido: 14-VII-2015.
Aceptado: 17-VIII-2015.
2145Nutr Hosp. 2015;32(5):2144-2152A coconut extra virgin oil-rich diet
increases HDL cholesterol and decreases
waist circumference and body mass...
Introduction
Secondary prevention for patients with coronary ar-
tery disease (CAD) aims to avoid new cardiovascular
events1
. The change towards a healthier lifestyle pre-
sents a 44% decrease in mortality from CAD2,3
. Recent
guidelines emphasize the necessity of reducing visceral
fat, and controlling blood pressure and dyslipidemia1,2
.
The adoption of a dietary pattern based on good
sources of mono- and polyunsaturated fat, fiber, fruit,
vegetables, whole grains, olive oil and nuts results in
the decrease of risk factors for cardiovascular disease.
On the other hand, according to the National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey (2007-2011), con-
ducted on 759 individuals with CAD, data showed
very low compliance to the nutritional and clinical
treatment, with only 20% displaying adequate body
weight, and 59% having lipid profile control4 .
New therapeutic targets are necessary to increase
compliance to dietary treatments. Due to this neces-
sity, the effects of functional foods 5 have been studied.
Although no consensus exists over the subject, func-
tional foods appear to exert some beneficial action on
lipid profile and promote better compliance to dietary
treatment6.
In this context, extra virgin coconut oil (Cocos nu-
cifera L.), extracted from the fresh coconut pulp, has
been acknowledged for its high proportion of me-
dium-chain fatty acids (MCFA), lauric acid7 (source of
vitamin E), and polyphenols with antioxidant activity8 .
The scientific literature has shown benefits of extra
virgin coconut oil to the reduction of body fat9,10,11 , but
there is still controversy over its effects on lipid profi-
le, since it is a source of saturated fat11 e 12
.
Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate the effect
of a diet rich in coconut oil concerning the improvement
of lipid profile and anthropometric measurements.
Methods
Study subjects and design
We conducted a nonrandomized 6-month clinical
trial, with 360 patients being initially screened. The
study included patients of both genders aged 45-85
years on secondary prevention of CAD (myocardial
infarction and/or stable angina), with the use of li-
pid-lowering drugs for longer than six months, seen at
an outpatient department of a specialized cardiology
hospital during January-September, 2012. It excluded
those who had coronary artery bypass grafting and
previous cardiovascular event within less than 6 mon-
ths, those who had chronic renal failure with creatinine
levels greater than 1.2 mg/dL, patients using coconut
oil, food supplements, and those who suffered from li-
ver diseases.
From the screened population, 136 patients met the
eligibility criteria for the three-month run-in phase in
order to homogenize or standardize their food intake.
From the third month the allocation was performed
for two intervention groups: diet group (DG) (n = 22),
who remained only with diet, and another group that
besides diet received extra virgin coconut oil (CODG)
(n = 92). The study details are better shown in figu-
re 1.
Patients were seen in a monthly basis at the cli-
nical nutrition department of a specialized hospital
where they received intensive dietary treatment with
periodic phone calls to assess compliance. In ad-
dition, all patients were provided with a telephone
number to contact to dispel doubts whenever neces-
sary. Socio economic and demographic data, infor-
mation on past medical history and present illness,
drug therapy, and physical exercise 13 were collec-
ted. In each visit, 12-hour fasting blood sample was
drawn, 24-hour dietary recall was obtained, anthro-
pometric assessment was made and systemic blood
pressure (BP) was measured. At the beginning of the
run-in period, all patients were given a adequate nu-
tritional status diet and instructed to follow it until
the end of the study.
The experimental protocol was approved by the
Research Ethics Committee of Instituto Nacional de
Cardiologia (INC)-RJ under no. 0305/2010, and its
National Clinical Trial (NCT) number is 01962844.
All the volunteers were informed about the procedures
they would undergo during the research, and signed
the statement of informed consent (SIC).
In addition, there was an increase in HDL-C concentra-
tions, Apo A, with significant difference in GD, only for
HDL-C (3.1 ± 7.4 mg/dL; p = 0.02).
Conclusion: it was observed that the nutritional treat-
ment associated with extra virgin coconut oil consump-
tion reduced the CC and increased HDL-C levels in pa-
tients with CAD.
(Nutr Hosp. 2015;32:2144-2152)
DOI:10.3305/nh.2015.32.5.9642
Key words: Coronary artery disease. Nutritional treat-
ment. Secondary prevention and extra virgin coconut oil.
Además, se produjo un aumento en las concentraciones de
HDL-C, Apo A, con una diferencia significativa en GD, solo
para HDL-C (3,1 ± 7,4 mg/dl; p = 0,02).
Conclusión: se observó que el tratamiento nutricional
asociado con el consumo de aceite de coco virgen extra
redujo la CC e incrementó los niveles de HDL-C en pa-
cientes con CAD.
(Nutr Hosp. 2015;32:2144-2152)
DOI:10.3305/nh.2015.32.5.9642
Palabras clave: Enfermedad coronaria arterial. Trata-
miento nutricional. Prevención secundaria y aceite de coco
virgen extra.
